docs/user_guide/phases/cluster.md, before:

# The Second Phase: ClusterPhase

Once point clouds have been created in the first phase, the next phase aims to break the point clouds into clusters. Clusters are collections of points which are presumed to belong to a single particle trajectory. Clustering is a very common form of unsupervised machine learning, clustering takes a dataset and applies labels to samples (points) based on the features (coordinates, charge). In this phase we make use of the [scikit-learn](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/clustering.html#clustering) algorithms.

There are three steps to this phase:

1. Initial clustering using HDBSCAN
2. Joining of clusters using circle-fitting and relative charge
3. Cleanup of joined clusters

Below we'll break down each of these steps. This phase is called `ClusterPhase`.

## Initial Clustering with HDBSCAN

In some ways AT-TPC data doesn't fit very neatly into many of the clustering algorithms. The data is in general noisy, trajectories are not isolated spatially, and the density of the points can vary within a single trajectory due to the small/large pads on the pad plane. Additionally, there can be gaps in the trajectory due to the hole in the pad plane. Thankfully, there is an algorithm, [HDBSCAN](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/clustering.html#hdbscan) which covers most of our bases.

HDBSCAN is a modified DBSCAN algorithm; DBSCAN stands for Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications wth Noise, and is a powerful clustering algorithm for noisy data. It clusters points based on their density (closeness to neighbors), but it assumes a *global* density. This means that DBSCAN assumes all clusters have the same density of points. As we mentioned before, this is not so good for AT-TPC data which can change density quite a bit. HDBSCAN however does not have this limitation. HDBSCAN scans density values forming clusters over different densities; the way it does this is fairly involved and we direct you to the [scikit-learn docs](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/clustering.html#hdbscan) for more details.

We cluster on the spatial coordinates (x, y, z). The z-axis is rescaled to make it the same total length as the x and y coordinates (this helps to avoid giving to much weight to separation on the z-axis). HDBSCAN, as implemented in scikit-learn, is also very fast, which is great because we have to do a lot of clustering!

However, this doesn't perfectly cluster our data right off the bat. HDBSCAN will make clusters over all the densities, but each density will get it's own cluster! This is not exactly what we want; we need to connect these pieces together to form the total trajectory.

Note that, before clustering, we prune the point cloud of any points which lie outside the legal bounds of the detector on the z-axis (i.e. remove all points for which z < 0.0 or z > detector length). This helps us avoid including any extra noise in the algorithm.

There are several parameters to HDBSCAN that are exposed in the [configuration](../config/cluster.md) of Spyral.

## Joining of Clusters

The core method of joining is relatively simple: each initial cluster is fit with a circle in the X-Y plane. If the circles overlap significantly they are taken to be from the same trajectory. The required amount of overlap is a [configuration](../config/cluster.md) parameter to be tuned for each experiment. Joining is repeated until clusters can no longer be joined together. These clusters are then taken to represent the complete detected particle trajectories for that event.

## Cleanup of the Final Clusters

As a last stage, a final noise removal is applied to each cluster. The [Local Outlier Factor](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.neighbors.LocalOutlierFactor.html#sklearn.neighbors.LocalOutlierFactor) is an outlier test which compares the distance to nearest neighbors (neighbor density) to determine outlier points. The number of neighbors is controlled using the [`outlier_scale_factor`](../config/cluster.md) parameter.

## Note

All of these steps will return a set of cluster representation (the acutal cluster objects) as well as an array of labels. The array of labels contains the label for each point in the *original* point cloud all of the clusters derived from. This is not really used in the actual analysis, but it is extremely useful for plotting the effects of the clustering.

## Final Thoughts

The intial clustering and joining are two of the most important steps in Spyral, but they often require compromises. In our experience, there is no perfect set of parameters that will allow the clustering to work flawlessly for all events in a dataset; in fact given the inhomogenetiy of AT-TPC data, expecting one set of parameters to work all the time is somewhat crazy. In general, it is best to shoot for parameters that *generally* work. There will always be events that are too noisy or too fragmented for the clustering algorithm to work correctly. As such, this is the section of the code that most often requires fine tuning by hand.

Commit message:

Cleanup the documentation and docstrings for changes to clustering, solving. Fix error propagation for ke. Fix size of error bars.

docs/user_guide/phases/cluster.md, after:

# The Second Phase: ClusterPhase

Once point clouds have been created in the first phase, the next phase aims to break the point clouds into clusters. Clusters are collections of points which are presumed to belong to a single particle trajectory. Clustering is a very common form of unsupervised machine learning, clustering takes a dataset and applies labels to samples (points) based on the features (coordinates, charge). In this phase we make use of the [scikit-learn](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/clustering.html#clustering) algorithms.

There are three steps to this phase:

1. Initial clustering using HDBSCAN
2. Joining of clusters using circle-fitting and relative charge
3. Cleanup of joined clusters

Below we'll break down each of these steps. This phase is called `ClusterPhase`.

## Initial Clustering with HDBSCAN

In some ways AT-TPC data doesn't fit very neatly into many of the clustering algorithms. The data is in general noisy, trajectories are not isolated spatially, and the density of the points can vary within a single trajectory due to the small/large pads on the pad plane. Additionally, there can be gaps in the trajectory due to the hole in the pad plane. Thankfully, there is an algorithm, [HDBSCAN](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/clustering.html#hdbscan) which covers most of our bases.

HDBSCAN is a modified DBSCAN algorithm; DBSCAN stands for Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications wth Noise, and is a powerful clustering algorithm for noisy data. It clusters points based on their density (closeness to neighbors), but it assumes a *global* density. This means that DBSCAN assumes all clusters have the same density of points. As we mentioned before, this is not so good for AT-TPC data which can change density quite a bit. HDBSCAN however does not have this limitation. HDBSCAN scans density values forming clusters over different densities; the way it does this is fairly involved and we direct you to the [scikit-learn docs](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/clustering.html#hdbscan) for more details.

We cluster on the spatial coordinates (x, y, z). The z-axis is rescaled to make it the same total length as the x and y coordinates (this helps to avoid giving to much weight to separation on the z-axis). HDBSCAN, as implemented in scikit-learn, is also very fast, which is great because we have to do a lot of clustering!

However, this doesn't perfectly cluster our data right off the bat. HDBSCAN will make clusters over all the densities, but each density will get it's own cluster! This is not exactly what we want; we need to connect these pieces together to form the total trajectory.

Note that, before clustering, we prune the point cloud of any points which lie outside the legal bounds of the detector on the z-axis (i.e. remove all points for which z < 0.0 or z > detector length). This helps us avoid including any extra noise in the algorithm.

There are several parameters to HDBSCAN that are exposed in the [configuration](../config/cluster.md) of Spyral.

## Joining of Clusters

The core method of joining is relatively simple: each initial cluster is fit with a circle in the X-Y plane. If the circles overlap significantly they are taken to be from the same trajectory. The required amount of overlap is a [configuration](../config/cluster.md) parameter to be tuned for each experiment. Additionally, to avoid having noise clusters be joined, a minimum size parameter is used such that clusters below the minimum size requirement are not evaluated in the joining. Joining is repeated until clusters can no longer be joined together. These clusters are then taken to represent the complete detected particle trajectories for that event.

## Cleanup of the Final Clusters

As a last stage, a final noise removal is applied to each cluster. The [Local Outlier Factor](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.neighbors.LocalOutlierFactor.html#sklearn.neighbors.LocalOutlierFactor) is an outlier test which compares the distance to nearest neighbors (neighbor density) to determine outlier points. The number of neighbors is controlled using the [`outlier_scale_factor`](../config/cluster.md) parameter.

## Note

All of these steps will return a set of cluster representation (the acutal cluster objects) as well as an array of labels. The array of labels contains the label for each point in the *original* point cloud all of the clusters derived from. This is not really used in the actual analysis, but it is extremely useful for plotting the effects of the clustering.

## Final Thoughts

The intial clustering and joining are two of the most important steps in Spyral, but they often require compromises. In our experience, there is no perfect set of parameters that will allow the clustering to work flawlessly for all events in a dataset; in fact given the inhomogenetiy of AT-TPC data, expecting one set of parameters to work all the time is somewhat crazy. In general, it is best to shoot for parameters that *generally* work. There will always be events that are too noisy or too fragmented for the clustering algorithm to work correctly. As such, this is the section of the code that most often requires fine tuning by hand.
